Kubernetes Learning Overview

This document summarizes the key points covered in the conversation regarding learning Kubernetes (k8s), local setup options, system requirements, and the capabilities Kubernetes provides.


---

1. Local Kubernetes Setup Options

You can run Kubernetes locally to learn the fundamentals and experiment with scaling. The most common tools are:

Minikube

A single-node Kubernetes cluster running on your local machine. Suitable for Windows, macOS, and Linux.

kind (Kubernetes IN Docker)

Runs Kubernetes clusters inside Docker containers. Very lightweight and fast to spin up.

k3d

A wrapper around k3s that runs lightweight Kubernetes inside Docker.


---

2. Minikube on Windows 11

Minikube can be installed on Windows 11 using Docker, Hyper-V, VirtualBox, or WSL2 as the virtualization driver.

Minimum Requirements:

CPU: 2 cores

RAM: 4 GB

Disk: ~20 GB free


Recommended:

CPU: 4+ cores

RAM: 8+ GB

Disk: 30–40 GB free



---

3. Testing Scaling in Kubernetes

To test how Kubernetes handles load and scaling, you can:

Manual Scaling

Increase replicas of a deployment using:

kubectl scale deployment <name> --replicas=<n>

Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA)

Automatically scales pods based on CPU or memory usage. Requires enabling the metrics server.

Generating Load

You can simulate traffic using tools like:

curl loops

hey (HTTP load generator)

A load generator pod inside the cluster


Observing Scaling

Watch how Kubernetes reacts:

kubectl get hpa -w
kubectl get pods -w

The Minikube dashboard can visually show scaling events.


---

4. What Kubernetes Does Beyond Scaling

While scaling is a major feature, Kubernetes offers a much broader set of capabilities.

Deployment & Scheduling

Kubernetes decides where to run containers and keeps them running as declared.

Load Balancing & Service Discovery

Automatically routes requests to healthy pods and provides stable network endpoints.

Self-Healing

Restarts crashed containers and replaces unhealthy pods automatically.

Configuration & Secrets Management

Handles environment variables, configuration files, and sensitive credentials through ConfigMaps and Secrets.

Persistent Storage

Supports persistent volumes for stateful applications.

Networking & Security

Uses RBAC, service accounts, and network policies to control access and communication.

Rolling Updates & Rollbacks

Enables zero-downtime deployments and automatic reversion if something goes wrong.

Observability

Integrates with tools for metrics, logs, and event tracking.

Portability

The same configuration works locally and in cloud environments.


---

5. Summary

Kubernetes is more than a scaling system. It is a full orchestration platform designed to deploy, manage, and maintain containerized applications reliably across different environments.

Key capabilities include:

Automated deployment and scheduling

Horizontal and vertical scaling

Load balancing

Self-healing

Configuration and secret management

Persistent storage handling

Security and networking controls

Rolling updates and rollbacks

Observability integrations

Cross-environment portability


This document provides a complete overview of the main concepts discussed and should serve as a reference as you continue learning Kubernetes.
